one of the most powerful tools when creating a shaded with procedural methods is
the ability to manipulate coordinate factories and
even generate your own custom coordinate maps.
Space manipulation is something we have been doing all along in this chapter
but it is still something I want to dedicate a whole video too.
As there are more intricacies and fundamental ideas
now that you have seen some of the applications,
I want to explain a bit more what goes into it.
This is also a good time to talk about the fundamental logic of shady no trees.
The information is processed from left to right.
So all the changes that you make in the notes
propagated from the left to the right as well.
This is why for example,
you don't apply a transform operation after an image texture in the no tree
to change its location but rather shift
the incoming coordinate factories at its left.
You can just use a vector method node to add a vector to the coordinates,
which shifts the texture by that vector.
This general logic should make sense by now
after we talked about the importance of coordinates.
But what I want to really point out in this section is that what you
are essentially doing is manipulating the space that
the texture on the right is drawn in
that idea is very useful to understand,
as it can be generalist for a broad variety of use cases
to visualize. Was actually going on when you are doing such space manipulation.
I made another visualization tool that should help you
to better understand what I mean by that.
I have the file with the tool opened up right now
and you can download it from the page with this video.
I will not go into too much detail of how this tool is
set up but let me quickly go over what we are looking at
on the left,
there are two view ports showing a plane on top of you
and on the right is the shade of note set up.
The core part of this tool is the note group that has already opened
up and if I tap out of it you can see the whole setup.
The only important part here is this part of the note
tree draws this very simple shape with the RGB curve method
that I already explained before and the coordinates that this shape
uses are manipulated in the Essential note group called space manipulation.
This note in between it's just there to dial in the effect of manipulation.
You can simply control this parameter with the effect of property in the view port.
To see the space manipulation.
Take effect, change the bottom view port to rendered,
that will change it into cycles rendering while the top
view port shows you the material preview with tv.
Right now there is no difference between the two
because the note group just passes through the original coordinates
but you will see what happens when we manipulate the texture space in just a second.
Okay, so now that you know the general set up, let's put this tool into action,
make sure that the factory slider is cranked up to
one and tap back into the space manipulation node group.
Right now it just passes through the incoming UV coordinates.
But if I add a vector math note in between,
you can see the texture being shifted in the
top view port just as you have seen before.
But something interesting is happening in the bottom
view port instead of the texture being shifted,
the texture itself is fixed in place and
the plane is shifted in the opposite direction.
This shows what's essentially happening when you
are manipulating the texture space like this.
The ad note shifts the coordinate system that the texture is drawn in
and so a different part of the texture is drawn on the plane.
The point that I want to make here is that you are actually not changing the
texture itself at all but rather manipulating the
texture space that is defined on the plane.
I know that this can be a tough concept to wrap your
head around completely but try to get familiar with this idea.
Of course adding is not the only operation that
can be applied to manipulate the coordinate space,
just like what we have done before to create shapes and patterns.
The space can be squished stretched,
warped and band ripped apart and put back
together to create all sorts of different effects.
I recommend you just play around with this idea and see what you can come up with but
I still want to go over a couple of useful ways that I personally use a lot.
So let's start with the standard methods of transformation which are offsetting,
rotating and scaling the way of approaching these is very
straightforward to get access to all three transformation types.
You can just use a mapping note.
If you have been using shading notes previously,
then you have probably already come across this note.
Maybe you have been wondering why for positive values it shifts the texture
in a negative direction or why values for the scale greater than one.
Make the texture appear smaller.
Well with this visualization you can see why what you are transforming with
the node is the actual coordinate system and not the texture itself.
When you change the type to texture, the exact inverse transformation is applied,
making it more intuitive to work with.
In a lot of cases you don't need to use all three transformation types.
You can also just supplement offsetting and scaling with a vector method,
node setting it to add for offsetting
and scale or alternatively multiply for scaling
for rotation.
You can just use the vector rotate note which also
has a bunch of more options than the mapping note.
Has
another advantage of using the transformations individually is that
you can choose the order in which they are applied
naturally.
There is a difference between rotating first and then shifting
along axes and doing it the other way around.
Being able to choose between those methods can simplify a lot of issues.
And now that we are on the subject of the order of operations,
I want to point out how crucial it can be to make the right decision in that regard.
It is a frequent source of errors as often times. It is not very intuitive.
I hope that this video and the tool that I'm providing,
help you to wrap your head around the logic of these operations.
Don't worry if this is giving you a hard time at first
it takes quite some getting used to this way of thinking.
You will probably confuse the order of operations for a long time.
Trust me,
I still do it a lot and if you are truly lost there's no
shame and just flipping the order of notes around until it works as intended.
That is one of the advantages of a note based trading system.
Now that we covered the basic transformations and
talked a bit about the importance of order.
That's generally is the idea of space manipulation further.
Instead of modifying the coordinate space with a simple vector operation,
you can also split it into its X, Y, Z components and modify those individually.
For example, just like you've seen in the previous chapter,
we can apply the ping pong operation to
the X component to achieve a mirrored repetition.
and now you can nicely see how it works.
The coordinate system is folded and goes back and
forth between X equals zero and X equals one.
In the same way you can of course use all the
other ways of controlling values to manipulate these coordinate values.
In theory there are no limits to how the space can be manipulated
just to prove this point.
I made a Suzanne silhouette just by manipulating
the texture space of this exact setup.
One very simple but effective method of space manipulation that I want
to mention is finally using a noise texture to drive the distortion
as I pointed out before a color is just a vector.
And so we can just use the colour output of the noise texture
and added to the coordinates.
This gives us a really nice distortion effect.
That is incredibly useful when you want to give a pattern some natural variation.
The only problem right now is that the values
of the noise texture are centered around 0.5.
This means that the coordinates as a whole are shifted on average.
To counter this effect, you can just subtract a factor of 0.5 from the noise.
Then it is centered around zero and you can also add
a scale note to change the amount of this effect.
Alternatively though you can simply use a color mix node instead
setting it to the blend mode linear light has the exact same effect.
The only disadvantage is that the amount slider now is clamped between zero and one.
Using the additional vector math nodes allows you
to apply the effect without a limit.
I mentioned in an earlier topic that there is a
way to fake blurring in the shade of notes.
Even without pixel based textures.
When you crank up the scale parameter of this noise texture,
you can see how this effect looks more and more like it is blurring the texture.
The problem here is that the texture itself is not actually being blurred.
An edge between black and white will not result in a great tone.
Just in a cluster of black and white dots.
You could get actual blurring by applying this effect
multiple times with different seeds and mixing the results.
This however is incredibly cast intensive and I
recommend avoiding this workflow as much as possible.
The last thing that I want to point out in this section
is that all of these operations can be used together in succession
space manipulation can be incredibly useful and vital for specific textures but it
can be an absolute pain to wrap your head around for complex setups,
luckily that's not necessary. Most of the time.
You can rather remember simple setups as
small chunks and build more complex traders,
modular lee just remember the logic that the coordinates on the left
influence the texture set up on the right as a whole.
Maybe after space manipulation.
You are already looking forward to manipulating time.
Well, we will be doing that in a later chapter of discourse.